Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the corticosteroids and endocrine drugs. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the corticosteroids and some endocrine drugs.
Begin with the physiology of cortisol.
Cortisol is the principal glucocorticoid,
secreted by the adrenal cortex under the control of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis:
the hypothalamus releases corticotrophin-releasing hormone,
stimulating the pituitary to release adrenocorticotrophic hormone,
which stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce cortisol,
with negative feedback from cortisol on the hypothalamus and pituitary.
Cortisol is secreted in a circadian rhythm, highest in the morning,
and its secretion rises markedly in response to stress, including surgery.
It has widespread effects: metabolic — promoting gluconeogenesis,
raising blood glucose, and affecting protein and fat metabolism;
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects;
permissive effects on the cardiovascular response to catecholamines;
and some mineralocorticoid activity,
promoting sodium and water retention and potassium loss.
So cortisol is the glucocorticoid produced by the adrenal cortex under
hypothalamic-pituitary control, secreted in a circadian and stress-responsive
manner, with metabolic, anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive,
cardiovascular-permissive and mineralocorticoid effects — the actions that the
synthetic corticosteroids reproduce.
Describe the synthetic corticosteroids and how they differ.
The synthetic corticosteroids are analogues of cortisol differing in their
glucocorticoid potency, their mineralocorticoid activity,
and their duration of action, which determines their use.
Hydrocortisone is essentially cortisol,
with balanced glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid activity and a short duration,
used for replacement and acute cover.
Prednisolone has greater glucocorticoid and less mineralocorticoid activity and an
intermediate duration, the common oral anti-inflammatory agent.
Dexamethasone and betamethasone are highly potent glucocorticoids with negligible
mineralocorticoid activity and a long duration,
used where a strong anti-inflammatory effect without sodium retention is wanted —
as in cerebral oedema, antiemesis and croup.
Methylprednisolone is a potent intermediate agent.
Fludrocortisone, by contrast, has predominantly mineralocorticoid activity,
used for mineralocorticoid replacement.
So the corticosteroids are chosen by their relative glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid potencies and duration — hydrocortisone for replacement,
prednisolone for oral anti-inflammatory use,
dexamethasone for potent mineralocorticoid-free effect,
fludrocortisone for mineralocorticoid replacement.
What is the mechanism of action of the glucocorticoids?
The glucocorticoids act predominantly through a genomic mechanism.
Being lipophilic, they diffuse into the cell and bind an intracellular
glucocorticoid receptor; the steroid-receptor complex then translocates to the
nucleus and alters gene transcription,
increasing the production of anti-inflammatory proteins and decreasing the
production of pro-inflammatory mediators such as cytokines,
and inhibiting the enzyme phospholipase A2,
reducing the formation of prostaglandins and leukotrienes.
Because this works through changes in protein synthesis,
the anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects have a delayed onset of hours,
which is why a steroid given for an acute effect, such as in anaphylaxis,
does not act immediately.
There are also some more rapid non-genomic effects at high doses.
So the glucocorticoids act mainly by binding an intracellular receptor and altering
gene transcription to produce anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects,
a genomic mechanism that accounts for their delayed onset of action.
What are the clinical uses of the corticosteroids in anaesthesia and beyond?
Their uses are wide. As replacement, they treat adrenal insufficiency.
As anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents, they treat asthma,
inflammatory and autoimmune disease, and prevent transplant rejection.
In anaesthesia specifically, dexamethasone is an effective antiemetic and provides
some analgesia; corticosteroids reduce airway oedema,
as in croup and post-extubation stridor,
and are an adjunct in the management of anaphylaxis;
dexamethasone reduces the cerebral oedema around tumours and raised intracranial
pressure; and steroids are given for perioperative cover in the adrenally
suppressed patient.
In obstetrics, antenatal corticosteroids accelerate fetal lung maturation before
preterm delivery.
So the corticosteroids are used for replacement,
for their anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects across many diseases,
and in anaesthesia for antiemesis, airway and cerebral oedema,
anaphylaxis and perioperative cover,
with antenatal use for fetal lung maturation — a versatility reflecting cortisol's
many physiological actions.
What are the adverse effects of corticosteroid therapy?
The adverse effects of prolonged corticosteroid therapy follow from excessive
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid action and constitute an iatrogenic Cushing's
syndrome.
Metabolic effects include hyperglycaemia and diabetes, central obesity,
a cushingoid appearance, and protein catabolism causing muscle wasting and thin
skin with easy bruising. They cause osteoporosis and avascular necrosis,
and growth suppression in children.
They impair immunity, increasing the risk and masking the signs of infection,
and impair wound healing. They cause peptic ulceration,
particularly with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
mood and sleep disturbance and, occasionally, psychosis, and cataracts.
The mineralocorticoid effect causes sodium and water retention with hypertension,
and hypokalaemia. Critically, prolonged therapy suppresses the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
So corticosteroid adverse effects are those of glucocorticoid excess —
hyperglycaemia, cushingoid changes, osteoporosis, immunosuppression,
peptic ulceration, mood disturbance — with mineralocorticoid effects of fluid
retention and hypokalaemia, and the crucial suppression of the adrenal axis.
Explain adrenal suppression and the need for perioperative steroid cover.
Prolonged administration of corticosteroids suppresses the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis through negative feedback,
so that the adrenal gland atrophies and cannot mount the normal surge of cortisol
that the body requires to respond to the stress of surgery.
If such a patient is subjected to surgery without additional steroid,
they may suffer an acute adrenal, or Addisonian, crisis — with profound,
refractory hypotension, cardiovascular collapse,
hypoglycaemia and electrolyte disturbance.
To prevent this, the patient on long-term steroids has their usual steroid
continued and is given additional perioperative steroid cover,
typically intravenous hydrocortisone,
in a dose and duration scaled to the magnitude of surgery — more for major surgery,
little or none for minor procedures.
So prolonged steroid therapy suppresses the adrenal axis so that the patient cannot
respond to surgical stress, risking an Addisonian crisis,
which is prevented by continuing their steroid and giving perioperative
hydrocortisone cover scaled to the surgical stress — a key anaesthetic
responsibility.
How does an Addisonian crisis present and how is it managed?
An acute adrenal crisis is a life-threatening deficiency of cortisol,
occurring in the patient with adrenal insufficiency — whether primary,
as in Addison's disease, or from suppression of the axis by exogenous steroids —
when stressed, as by surgery, infection or trauma,
or when steroids are abruptly withdrawn.
It presents with profound hypotension and shock that is refractory to fluids and
vasopressors, with hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia where there is
mineralocorticoid deficiency, and non-specific features of vomiting,
abdominal pain and a reduced conscious level.
Its management is urgent: immediate intravenous hydrocortisone to replace the
cortisol, aggressive fluid resuscitation with intravenous saline and glucose,
correction of the electrolyte and glucose abnormalities,
and treatment of the precipitating cause.
Recognition is key, as it is reversible with prompt steroid.
So an Addisonian crisis presents with refractory hypotension,
hypoglycaemia and electrolyte disturbance,
managed urgently with intravenous hydrocortisone,
fluids and correction of glucose and electrolytes — the emergency that
perioperative cover exists to prevent.
Describe the drugs used in thyroid disease.
Thyroid disease is managed with drugs that replace or suppress thyroid hormone.
In hypothyroidism, replacement is with levothyroxine, synthetic thyroxine,
titrated to the thyroid function tests; it is continued perioperatively,
and severe untreated hypothyroidism increases anaesthetic risk.
In hyperthyroidism, the thionamides — carbimazole and propylthiouracil — reduce the
synthesis of thyroid hormone, propylthiouracil also reducing the peripheral
conversion of thyroxine to the active tri-iodothyronine;
their serious adverse effect is agranulocytosis.
Beta-blockers control the sympathetic symptoms.
Definitive treatment may be radioiodine or surgery.
The patient should be rendered euthyroid before elective surgery to avoid thyroid
storm — a life-threatening crisis of severe thyrotoxicosis,
managed with beta-blockers, thionamides, iodine and supportive care.
So thyroid disease is treated with levothyroxine for hypothyroidism and the
thionamides carbimazole and propylthiouracil, with beta-blockers,
for hyperthyroidism, rendering the patient euthyroid before surgery to avoid
thyroid storm.
What is the relevance of etomidate to adrenal function?
Etomidate, the intravenous induction agent valued for its cardiovascular stability,
has an important effect on adrenal function:
it inhibits the enzyme eleven-beta-hydroxylase,
which is required for the synthesis of cortisol,
so it suppresses adrenal steroidogenesis.
Even a single induction dose causes a measurable,
transient suppression of cortisol production for some hours,
and prolonged administration, as was once used for sedation in intensive care,
caused sustained adrenal suppression associated with increased mortality,
which led to the abandonment of that practice.
The relevance is greatest in the critically ill,
particularly those with septic shock who depend on their cortisol response,
in whom even a single dose of etomidate has been a subject of concern and caution.
So etomidate inhibits cortisol synthesis through eleven-beta-hydroxylase,
causing transient adrenal suppression after a single dose and dangerous sustained
suppression with infusion, which is why it is not used for prolonged sedation and
is used cautiously in the septic and critically ill.
Pull it together: how do you use the corticosteroids rationally,
especially perioperatively?
I would use the corticosteroids by matching the agent's glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid potency and duration to the purpose — hydrocortisone for
replacement and acute cover, prednisolone for chronic oral anti-inflammatory use,
dexamethasone for potent mineralocorticoid-free effects such as antiemesis,
airway and cerebral oedema — using the lowest effective dose for the shortest time
to limit the adverse effects of glucocorticoid excess and adrenal suppression.
Perioperatively, the central responsibility is to recognise the patient on
long-term steroids, continue their steroid,
and provide hydrocortisone cover scaled to the surgical stress,
to prevent an Addisonian crisis, which I would recognise and treat urgently with
hydrocortisone and fluids if it occurred.
I would manage associated endocrine therapy — continuing levothyroxine,
rendering the hyperthyroid euthyroid before surgery — and use etomidate cautiously
given its adrenal effect.
So rational use matches the steroid to the purpose at the lowest effective dose,
and perioperatively centres on adrenal cover to prevent crisis.
Give the relative potencies and durations of the common corticosteroids.
Comparing them against hydrocortisone, taken as the reference, clarifies their use.
Hydrocortisone has a glucocorticoid potency of one and significant
mineralocorticoid activity, with a short duration of around eight to twelve hours.
Prednisolone has about four times the glucocorticoid potency,
much less mineralocorticoid activity, and an intermediate duration.
Methylprednisolone is a little more potent again,
with minimal mineralocorticoid effect.
Dexamethasone and betamethasone are the most potent glucocorticoids,
around twenty-five to thirty times hydrocortisone,
with negligible mineralocorticoid activity and a long duration of more than a day
and a half, which is why dexamethasone is used as a single antiemetic dose and for
sustained anti-inflammatory effect.
Fludrocortisone has weak glucocorticoid but very high mineralocorticoid potency,
used for mineralocorticoid replacement.
So potency rises and mineralocorticoid activity falls from hydrocortisone through
prednisolone to dexamethasone, with duration lengthening,
and fludrocortisone stands apart as the mineralocorticoid — a comparison that
guides agent selection.
Describe mineralocorticoid physiology and its disorders.
Aldosterone, the principal mineralocorticoid from the zona glomerulosa of the
adrenal cortex, regulates sodium and potassium balance and so blood volume and
pressure.
It is released in response to angiotensin two through the renin-angiotensin system,
to a rise in potassium, and to corticotrophin,
and it acts on the collecting duct to promote sodium reabsorption in exchange for
potassium and hydrogen, conserving sodium and water and excreting potassium and
acid.
Its excess, as in primary hyperaldosteronism — Conn's syndrome — causes
hypertension and hypokalaemia, treated with the aldosterone antagonist
spironolactone or surgery.
Its deficiency, as in Addison's disease or hypoaldosteronism,
causes sodium and water loss with hypotension, hyperkalaemia and acidosis,
treated with the mineralocorticoid fludrocortisone.
So mineralocorticoid physiology centres on aldosterone's control of sodium and
potassium at the collecting duct under the renin-angiotensin system,
its excess causing hypertension and hypokalaemia and its deficiency hypotension and
hyperkalaemia — disorders treated with spironolactone or fludrocortisone
respectively.
Detail the regimens for perioperative steroid cover.
Perioperative steroid cover is scaled to the degree of adrenal suppression and the
magnitude of surgical stress, following guidelines,
the aim being to reproduce the cortisol surge the suppressed patient cannot mount.
The patient takes their usual steroid dose on the day.
For minor surgery under brief anaesthesia,
the usual dose may suffice or a small additional dose of hydrocortisone is given at
induction. For moderate surgery, hydrocortisone is given at induction and continued
for a day.
For major surgery, hydrocortisone is given at induction and then by repeated doses
or infusion for one to three days, tapering as recovery allows,
returning to the usual oral dose.
Patients at risk include those on significant doses for more than a few weeks,
and recently stopped.
So steroid cover is graded — minimal for minor surgery,
a single induction dose with short continuation for moderate,
and induction hydrocortisone with one to three days' continuation for major surgery
— reproducing the stress cortisol response in the adrenally suppressed patient.
What is the immunosuppressive consequence of corticosteroids,
and which infections does it predispose to?
Corticosteroids are powerfully immunosuppressive,
reducing the function of leucocytes,
suppressing inflammation and cell-mediated immunity,
which both underlies their therapeutic use in inflammatory and autoimmune disease
and transplantation and causes a clinically important increase in the risk of
infection.
They increase susceptibility to common bacterial infections and can mask their
signs, such as fever, delaying recognition.
With prolonged or high-dose therapy they predispose to opportunistic infections —
reactivation of tuberculosis, Pneumocystis pneumonia,
for which prophylaxis is given in high-risk immunosuppression,
fungal infections such as candidiasis,
and the reactivation of viruses such as herpes zoster.
They impair wound healing. The implications are vigilance for infection,
prophylaxis where indicated, and care in the immunosuppressed surgical patient.
So corticosteroid immunosuppression increases the risk of bacterial infection while
masking its signs and predisposes to opportunistic infections — tuberculosis,
Pneumocystis pneumonia, fungal and viral reactivation — a major adverse consequence
requiring vigilance and, in high-risk cases, prophylaxis.
Describe thyroid storm and its management.
Thyroid storm, or thyrotoxic crisis, is a rare,
life-threatening exacerbation of thyrotoxicosis,
which may be precipitated by surgery,
infection or other stress in an inadequately treated hyperthyroid patient,
which is why patients should be rendered euthyroid before elective surgery.
It presents with hyperpyrexia, marked tachycardia and arrhythmias such as atrial
fibrillation, heart failure, agitation and delirium,
and gastrointestinal disturbance, and can progress to cardiovascular collapse.
Its management is urgent and multi-pronged: a beta-blocker,
such as propranolol or esmolol, to control the sympathetic and cardiac effects;
a thionamide — propylthiouracil or carbimazole — to block hormone synthesis;
iodine, given after the thionamide, to block hormone release; corticosteroids,
which reduce peripheral conversion and treat any relative adrenal insufficiency;
active cooling and supportive care; and treatment of the precipitant.
So thyroid storm is a life-threatening thyrotoxic crisis managed with
beta-blockade, a thionamide, iodine after the thionamide, corticosteroids,
cooling and supportive care, with treatment of the precipitant — the emergency that
pre-operative euthyroidism aims to prevent.
What is myxoedema coma?
Myxoedema coma is the rare, life-threatening extreme of severe hypothyroidism,
a decompensation precipitated by stress such as infection, cold,
surgery or sedative drugs in a profoundly hypothyroid patient.
It presents with a reduced conscious level progressing to coma, hypothermia,
bradycardia and hypotension, hypoventilation with carbon dioxide retention,
and hyponatraemia and hypoglycaemia. It carries a high mortality.
Its management is in critical care,
with cautious thyroid hormone replacement — intravenous levothyroxine,
sometimes with tri-iodothyronine — corticosteroids given because of the risk of
coexisting adrenal insufficiency, careful supportive treatment of the hypothermia,
ventilation, hyponatraemia and hypoglycaemia, and treatment of the precipitant,
all undertaken cautiously to avoid precipitating cardiac events.
So myxoedema coma is the life-threatening extreme of hypothyroidism with coma,
hypothermia and hypoventilation, managed with cautious thyroid replacement,
corticosteroids and supportive critical care — the counterpart to thyroid storm,
again underlining the importance of treating thyroid disease before surgery.
Describe the inhaled and topical corticosteroids and their systemic effects.
Corticosteroids are widely used by inhaled and topical routes to deliver a local
anti-inflammatory effect while minimising systemic exposure.
Inhaled corticosteroids, such as beclometasone and budesonide,
are the mainstay of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease control,
reducing airway inflammation; their local effects include oral candidiasis and a
hoarse voice, and at high doses some systemic absorption can cause systemic effects
and a degree of adrenal suppression.
Topical corticosteroids treat skin disease,
with local effects such as skin thinning and, with potent agents over large areas,
systemic absorption.
The key point is that, although designed for local action,
sufficient doses of inhaled or topical steroids can be absorbed to cause systemic
effects, including adrenal suppression relevant to perioperative steroid cover in
patients on high doses.
So inhaled and topical corticosteroids deliver local anti-inflammatory effects with
mainly local side effects, but at high doses are absorbed enough to cause systemic
effects and adrenal suppression, which must be considered perioperatively.
What are the dangers of abrupt corticosteroid withdrawal?
Abrupt withdrawal of corticosteroids after prolonged therapy is dangerous because
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis has been suppressed and the adrenal gland
atrophied, so that sudden cessation leaves the patient unable to produce adequate
cortisol, precipitating an acute adrenal crisis with hypotension,
hypoglycaemia and collapse, particularly if they are simultaneously stressed by
illness or surgery.
There may also be a withdrawal syndrome and a flare of the underlying disease for
which the steroid was given.
For these reasons, corticosteroids taken for more than a short course are withdrawn
gradually, by tapering the dose, to allow the axis to recover,
and are never stopped abruptly in the perioperatively suppressed patient,
who instead receives cover.
So abrupt corticosteroid withdrawal risks an adrenal crisis from the suppressed,
atrophied adrenal axis, as well as disease flare,
which is why prolonged steroids are tapered gradually and continued with cover
around surgery — the mirror of the steroid-cover principle.
How would you manage a patient on long-term steroids presenting for emergency
surgery?
For the patient on long-term steroids presenting for emergency surgery,
I would assume adrenal suppression and ensure adequate cortisol cover without
delaying the surgery.
I would quickly establish their steroid history, continue their usual steroid,
and give intravenous hydrocortisone cover at induction and continuing appropriately
for the magnitude of the surgery and the stress,
since an emergency is itself a major stress.
I would be vigilant for an adrenal crisis — refractory hypotension, hypoglycaemia,
hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia — and ready to treat it with further
hydrocortisone, fluids and correction of glucose and electrolytes,
recognising that hypotension in this setting may be adrenal rather than purely
haemodynamic.
I would manage the underlying surgical condition and any sepsis,
which raises cortisol requirements further.
So in emergency surgery I would assume suppression,
give hydrocortisone cover promptly without delaying surgery,
watch for and treat an adrenal crisis,
and account for the heightened cortisol demand of the emergency and any sepsis.
Give a final integrated account of corticosteroid use and the endocrine
considerations.
I would use corticosteroids by matching the agent's glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid potency and duration to the purpose — hydrocortisone for
replacement and cover, prednisolone for chronic oral anti-inflammatory use,
dexamethasone for potent mineralocorticoid-free effects such as antiemesis and
cerebral oedema, fludrocortisone for mineralocorticoid replacement — at the lowest
effective dose for the shortest time,
mindful of the adverse effects of glucocorticoid excess,
immunosuppression and adrenal suppression,
and never stopping prolonged therapy abruptly.
Perioperatively my central duty is to recognise the suppressed patient and provide
hydrocortisone cover scaled to the surgical stress, preventing and, if needed,
treating an adrenal crisis.
I would manage the wider endocrine issues — rendering the hyperthyroid euthyroid
before surgery to avoid thyroid storm, continuing levothyroxine,
treating thyroid and adrenal emergencies,
and accounting for steroid-induced hyperglycaemia.
So rational use matches the steroid to the purpose at the lowest dose,
centres perioperatively on adrenal cover,
and integrates the management of thyroid and other endocrine considerations.
Distinguish the genomic and non-genomic actions of corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids act by two mechanisms differing in speed.
The genomic mechanism is the principal one: the lipophilic steroid enters the cell,
binds an intracellular glucocorticoid receptor,
and the complex enters the nucleus to alter gene transcription,
increasing anti-inflammatory and decreasing pro-inflammatory protein synthesis.
Because this works through changes in protein production, it is slow,
taking hours to develop, which is why a steroid given in anaphylaxis or acute
asthma does not act immediately and is an adjunct rather than the first-line
treatment.
The non-genomic mechanism involves more rapid effects, occurring within minutes,
mediated by membrane-associated receptors and physicochemical interactions,
becoming prominent at high doses, and may underlie some of the rapid effects of
high-dose steroid.
So corticosteroids act predominantly by a slow genomic mechanism altering gene
transcription, accounting for their delayed onset and their adjunctive role in
acute emergencies, with more rapid non-genomic effects at high doses — the
distinction explaining why steroids are not relied upon for immediate effect.
Describe Cushing's syndrome.
Cushing's syndrome is the clinical state of chronic glucocorticoid excess,
which is most commonly iatrogenic, from corticosteroid therapy,
and otherwise endogenous — from a pituitary adenoma secreting corticotrophin,
called Cushing's disease, an adrenal tumour,
or ectopic corticotrophin from a tumour.
Its features are those of glucocorticoid excess:
central obesity with a rounded plethoric face and a dorsocervical fat pad,
thin skin with purple striae and easy bruising,
proximal muscle wasting and weakness, hypertension, hyperglycaemia or diabetes,
osteoporosis, mood disturbance, and, where there is mineralocorticoid effect,
hypokalaemia.
It is diagnosed by demonstrating excess cortisol that fails to suppress,
and the cause localised. Treatment addresses the cause — stopping exogenous steroid
where possible, or surgery for a tumour — sometimes with drugs that inhibit steroid
synthesis.
So Cushing's syndrome is chronic glucocorticoid excess, usually iatrogenic,
with central obesity, skin and muscle changes, hypertension,
hyperglycaemia and osteoporosis, diagnosed by non-suppressible cortisol and treated
by addressing the cause.
Describe Addison's disease and how it is distinguished from secondary adrenal
insufficiency.
Addison's disease is primary adrenal insufficiency,
the failure of the adrenal cortex itself,
most commonly from autoimmune destruction,
causing deficiency of both cortisol and aldosterone.
The loss of cortisol causes fatigue, weight loss, hypotension and hypoglycaemia,
and the loss of aldosterone causes salt wasting with hyponatraemia,
hyperkalaemia and volume depletion; a characteristic feature is hyperpigmentation,
from the high corticotrophin and related peptides stimulating melanocytes.
It is distinguished from secondary adrenal insufficiency — due to pituitary or
hypothalamic failure or, most commonly,
suppression of the axis by exogenous steroids — in which corticotrophin is low
rather than high: so there is no hyperpigmentation,
and because aldosterone is regulated mainly by the renin-angiotensin system rather
than corticotrophin, mineralocorticoid function is largely preserved,
so the salt wasting and hyperkalaemia are absent.
So Addison's disease is primary adrenal failure with cortisol and aldosterone
deficiency and hyperpigmentation, distinguished from secondary insufficiency,
which has low corticotrophin, no hyperpigmentation and preserved mineralocorticoid
function — a distinction reflected in the clinical picture.
What is the short Synacthen test?
The short Synacthen test, or short corticotrophin stimulation test,
is the standard investigation for adrenal insufficiency,
assessing the adrenal gland's ability to produce cortisol in response to
stimulation.
A baseline plasma cortisol is taken,
then synthetic corticotrophin — tetracosactide,
the trade name Synacthen — is given,
and the plasma cortisol is measured again after thirty and sixty minutes.
A normal adrenal gland responds with a rise in cortisol above a defined threshold;
a failure to rise adequately indicates adrenal insufficiency.
It detects primary adrenal failure directly,
and longstanding secondary insufficiency through the resulting adrenal atrophy that
fails to respond, though very recent secondary insufficiency may be missed as the
gland has not yet atrophied.
It helps identify patients who will need steroid cover.
So the short Synacthen test measures the cortisol response to synthetic
corticotrophin, an inadequate rise indicating adrenal insufficiency,
used to diagnose primary and established secondary insufficiency and to identify
patients requiring perioperative steroid cover.
What are the perioperative implications of the combined oral contraceptive and
hormone replacement therapy?
The oestrogen-containing combined oral contraceptive and hormone replacement
therapy are relevant perioperatively because oestrogen increases the risk of venous
thromboembolism, which adds to the thrombotic risk of surgery and immobility.
The combined oral contraceptive is associated with an increased venous
thromboembolism risk, so guidance often recommends stopping it some weeks before
major or high-risk surgery, balanced against the risk of unintended pregnancy and
the need for alternative contraception,
while for minor surgery it may be continued with thromboprophylaxis.
Hormone replacement therapy carries a smaller risk and is generally continued with
appropriate thromboprophylaxis. In all cases the decision weighs the thrombotic
risk against the consequences of stopping,
and venous thromboembolism prophylaxis is applied.
The progestogen-only contraceptive does not carry the same risk.
So the oestrogen in the combined oral contraceptive and hormone replacement therapy
raises venous thromboembolism risk,
prompting consideration of stopping the combined pill before major surgery,
with thromboprophylaxis applied, the decision balancing thrombosis against the
consequences of cessation.
Describe the drugs that inhibit steroid synthesis.
Several drugs inhibit adrenal steroid synthesis and are used in conditions of
cortisol excess, principally to control Cushing's syndrome before definitive
treatment.
Metyrapone inhibits eleven-beta-hydroxylase,
the enzyme catalysing the final step of cortisol synthesis, lowering cortisol;
it is used to control hypercortisolism and diagnostically.
Ketoconazole, an antifungal, inhibits several steps of steroid synthesis and is
used to lower cortisol in Cushing's syndrome, though it is hepatotoxic.
Other agents include the more selective osilodrostat.
Etomidate, the anaesthetic, also inhibits eleven-beta-hydroxylase and has been used
in low dose to control severe cortisol excess in critical illness.
These contrast with the corticosteroids themselves,
which supplement rather than inhibit.
So drugs such as metyrapone and ketoconazole — and, notably,
the anaesthetic etomidate — inhibit adrenal steroid synthesis,
used to control the cortisol excess of Cushing's syndrome,
the mirror image of the replacement and cover provided by the corticosteroids.
What is the relevance of acromegaly and its treatment to anaesthesia?
Acromegaly, the syndrome of growth hormone excess,
usually from a pituitary adenoma, is highly relevant to anaesthesia because of its
effects on the airway and the cardiovascular system.
The overgrowth of soft tissues causes a large tongue,
thickened pharyngeal and laryngeal tissues and a narrowed airway,
predicting difficult mask ventilation and intubation,
with a risk of obstructive sleep apnoea.
There is frequently hypertension, cardiomyopathy and conduction disease,
and impaired glucose tolerance. The patient must be assessed for these.
The medical treatment, where surgery is not curative,
includes the somatostatin analogue octreotide,
which suppresses growth hormone and is also used to control the cardiovascular and
metabolic effects, and dopamine agonists and growth-hormone-receptor antagonists.
So acromegaly is anaesthetically important for its difficult airway from
soft-tissue overgrowth, sleep apnoea, and cardiovascular and glucose disturbance,
requiring careful airway and cardiac assessment,
and is treated medically with octreotide and other agents — an endocrine disease
with major anaesthetic implications.
Describe diabetes insipidus and its treatment.
Diabetes insipidus is a disorder of water balance caused by a deficiency of,
or resistance to, antidiuretic hormone — vasopressin — leading to the inability to
concentrate the urine, so that large volumes of dilute urine are passed with
consequent thirst and, if water is not replaced, hypernatraemic dehydration.
Cranial diabetes insipidus, from deficient vasopressin secretion,
follows pituitary or hypothalamic damage, including surgery and trauma;
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, from renal resistance to vasopressin,
has other causes.
It is relevant perioperatively, particularly after pituitary and neurosurgery,
where it must be recognised and the large fluid losses and rising sodium managed.
Cranial diabetes insipidus is treated with desmopressin,
a synthetic vasopressin analogue, replacing the hormone,
with careful fluid and electrolyte management.
So diabetes insipidus is the passage of large volumes of dilute urine from
deficiency of or resistance to vasopressin, risking hypernatraemic dehydration,
important after pituitary and neurosurgery, and treated, in the cranial form,
with desmopressin and careful fluid and sodium management.
Give a final integrated account of the endocrine drugs in anaesthetic practice.
I would view the endocrine drugs as agents that replace,
suppress or modulate hormonal systems, each with anaesthetic implications.
The corticosteroids are central: matched to purpose by potency and duration,
used at the lowest effective dose, never stopped abruptly,
and — the key perioperative duty — supplemented with hydrocortisone cover scaled to
surgical stress in the suppressed patient to prevent an adrenal crisis.
The thyroid drugs require the patient to be rendered euthyroid before surgery,
with levothyroxine continued and the hyperthyroid treated to avoid thyroid storm.
The antidiabetic drugs maintain safe glucose control through fasting and stress.
Desmopressin treats cranial diabetes insipidus,
octreotide controls acromegaly and its airway and cardiac implications,
and drugs such as metyrapone control cortisol excess.
Throughout, I would assess the endocrine disease for its systemic and airway
effects, optimise it before surgery,
and manage the drugs to maintain hormonal stability.
So the endocrine drugs replace, suppress or modulate hormonal systems,
with corticosteroid cover, euthyroidism,
glucose control and disease optimisation the recurring perioperative themes.
Describe the anti-inflammatory mechanism of corticosteroids in more detail.
The anti-inflammatory action of the corticosteroids operates at many points of the
inflammatory and immune response, mediated through their genomic regulation of gene
transcription.
They induce the synthesis of anti-inflammatory proteins, including annexin-one,
formerly called lipocortin, which inhibits phospholipase A2,
the enzyme that liberates arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids;
this reduces the production of the prostaglandins and leukotrienes that mediate
inflammation.
They suppress the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines and other mediators,
reduce the expression of enzymes such as cyclo-oxygenase-two,
stabilise cell membranes, reduce the recruitment and activation of inflammatory
cells, and suppress lymphocyte function and cell-mediated immunity.
The net effect is a broad damping of inflammation and immune response,
which is both therapeutic and the source of the immunosuppressive adverse effects.
So corticosteroids act anti-inflammatorily by inducing annexin-one to inhibit
phospholipase A2 and reduce prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis,
and by suppressing pro-inflammatory cytokine and enzyme transcription and
inflammatory-cell and lymphocyte function — a broad,
transcription-mediated damping of inflammation underlying both their benefit and
their immunosuppression.
What is the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion?
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion is a disorder of water
balance in which antidiuretic hormone is secreted, or acts,
in excess of the body's need, causing the kidney to retain water inappropriately,
which dilutes the plasma sodium to produce a euvolaemic hyponatraemia with a
concentrated urine and a high urinary sodium.
Its causes are many and relevant perioperatively — certain drugs including some
anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine, opioids, pain, nausea and stress,
lung and central nervous system disease, and malignancy.
The hyponatraemia, if severe or rapid,
causes cerebral oedema with confusion and seizures.
Its management is to treat the cause and to restrict water intake,
with more active measures — careful sodium correction,
and vasopressin-receptor antagonists — for severe cases,
always correcting the sodium gradually to avoid osmotic demyelination.
So the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone is excess
antidiuretic-hormone effect causing euvolaemic dilutional hyponatraemia with
concentrated urine, with many perioperative causes,
managed by treating the cause and restricting water,
correcting sodium gradually — an endocrine cause of the hyponatraemia discussed
with fluids.
Describe the aldosterone antagonists.
The aldosterone antagonists, or mineralocorticoid-receptor antagonists,
oppose the action of aldosterone at its receptor in the renal collecting duct,
reducing sodium reabsorption and potassium excretion,
so they act as potassium-sparing diuretics and antihypertensives,
and have important roles beyond simple diuresis.
Spironolactone is the prototype; eplerenone is more selective with fewer endocrine
side effects. They are used in primary hyperaldosteronism;
in resistant hypertension; and, importantly, in heart failure,
where they reduce mortality, and in the ascites of liver disease.
Their characteristic adverse effect is hyperkalaemia,
from the potassium-sparing action, particularly with renal impairment or other
potassium-raising drugs, requiring monitoring;
spironolactone also causes anti-androgenic effects such as gynaecomastia,
which eplerenone largely avoids.
So the aldosterone antagonists spironolactone and eplerenone block the
mineralocorticoid receptor, acting as potassium-sparing diuretics and
antihypertensives with a key mortality benefit in heart failure,
their main risk being hyperkalaemia and, for spironolactone,
anti-androgenic effects — the pharmacological counterpart to mineralocorticoid
physiology.
How long does the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis take to recover after
steroids?
Recovery of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis after prolonged corticosteroid
therapy is slow and variable, which is why steroids are tapered and why cover is
given for a period after stopping.
The suppression depends on the dose and duration:
short courses of a week or two cause little lasting suppression,
but prolonged supraphysiological therapy suppresses the axis such that,
after the steroid is withdrawn, the pituitary and adrenal may take many months —
sometimes up to a year — to recover their full responsiveness,
with the pituitary recovering before the adrenal.
During this recovery period the patient remains at risk of being unable to mount an
adequate cortisol response to stress,
so they may need steroid cover for surgery even some months after stopping
long-term steroids, and abrupt cessation is avoided.
So the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis recovers slowly after prolonged steroids
— over months and sometimes up to a year — so patients remain at risk of an
inadequate stress response and may need perioperative cover for months after
stopping, underlining the need for gradual withdrawal and a careful steroid history.
Thank you. A thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Cortisol is the adrenal glucocorticoid under hypothalamic-pituitary control,
secreted in a circadian and stress-responsive way, with metabolic (gluconeogenesis,
hyperglycaemia), anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive,
cardiovascular-permissive and mineralocorticoid effects.
2.
Synthetic steroids differ in glucocorticoid potency,
mineralocorticoid activity and duration: hydrocortisone (replacement/cover),
prednisolone (oral anti-inflammatory), dexamethasone/betamethasone (potent,
no mineralocorticoid — antiemesis, cerebral/airway oedema),
fludrocortisone (mineralocorticoid replacement);
they act via an intracellular receptor altering gene transcription,
hence a delayed onset.
Second, Uses include replacement, anti-inflammatory/immunosuppression, antiemesis,
airway and cerebral oedema, anaphylaxis adjunct,
perioperative cover and antenatal fetal lung maturation;
adverse effects of prolonged use are an iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
(hyperglycaemia, osteoporosis, immunosuppression, peptic ulcer,
mood change) plus mineralocorticoid fluid retention and hypokalaemia.
Third, Prolonged steroids suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
so the patient cannot mount a stress cortisol response — give perioperative
hydrocortisone cover scaled to surgery to prevent an Addisonian crisis (refractory
hypotension, hypoglycaemia, electrolyte disturbance),
treated urgently with IV hydrocortisone, fluids and electrolyte/glucose correction.
Fourth, Thyroid disease: levothyroxine for hypothyroidism (continue
perioperatively); carbimazole/propylthiouracil with beta-blockers for
hyperthyroidism (render euthyroid before surgery to avoid thyroid storm;
agranulocytosis is the serious risk); etomidate inhibits 11-beta-hydroxylase,
causing transient adrenal suppression — used cautiously in the critically ill.
Thank you. That concludes the station.